Shuffle operations
Certain operations within Spark trigger an event known as the shuffle. The shuffle is Spark’s mechanism for re-distributing data so that it’s grouped differently across partitions. This typically involves copying data across executors and machines, making the shuffle a complex and costly operation.

Background
To understand what happens during the shuffle we can consider the example of the reduceByKey operation. The reduceByKey operation generates a new RDD where all values for a single key are combined into a tuple - the key and the result of executing a reduce function against all values associated with that key. The challenge is that not all values for a single key necessarily reside on the same partition, or even the same machine, but they must be co-located to compute the result.

In Spark, data is generally not distributed across partitions to be in the necessary place for a specific operation. During computations, a single task will operate on a single partition - thus, to organize all the data for a single reduceByKey reduce task to execute, Spark needs to perform an all-to-all operation. It must read from all partitions to find all the values for all keys, and then bring together values across partitions to compute the final result for each key - this is called the shuffle.

Although the set of elements in each partition of newly shuffled data will be deterministic, and so is the ordering of partitions themselves, the ordering of these elements is not. If one desires predictably ordered data following shuffle then it’s possible to use:

mapPartitions to sort each partition using, for example, .sorted
repartitionAndSortWithinPartitions to efficiently sort partitions while simultaneously repartitioning
sortBy to make a globally ordered RDD
Operations which can cause a shuffle include repartition operations like repartition and coalesce, ‘ByKey operations (except for counting) like groupByKey and reduceByKey, and join operations like cogroup and join.

Performance Impact
The Shuffle is an expensive operation since it involves disk I/O, data serialization, and network I/O. To organize data for the shuffle, Spark generates sets of tasks - map tasks to organize the data, and a set of reduce tasks to aggregate it. This nomenclature comes from MapReduce and does not directly relate to Spark’s map and reduce operations.

Internally, results from individual map tasks are kept in memory until they can’t fit. Then, these are sorted based on the target partition and written to a single file. On the reduce side, tasks read the relevant sorted blocks.

Certain shuffle operations can consume significant amounts of heap memory since they employ in-memory data structures to organize records before or after transferring them. Specifically, reduceByKey and aggregateByKey create these structures on the map side, and 'ByKey operations generate these on the reduce side. When data does not fit in memory Spark will spill these tables to disk, incurring the additional overhead of disk I/O and increased garbage collection.

Shuffle also generates a large number of intermediate files on disk. As of Spark 1.3, these files are preserved until the corresponding RDDs are no longer used and are garbage collected. This is done so the shuffle files don’t need to be re-created if the lineage is re-computed. Garbage collection may happen only after a long period of time, if the application retains references to these RDDs or if GC does not kick in frequently. This means that long-running Spark jobs may consume a large amount of disk space. The temporary storage directory is specified by the spark.local.dir configuration parameter when configuring the Spark context.

Shuffle behavior can be tuned by adjusting a variety of configuration parameters. See the ‘Shuffle Behavior’ section within the Spark Configuration Guide.

RDD Persistence
One of the most important capabilities in Spark is persisting (or caching) a dataset in memory across operations. When you persist an RDD, each node stores any partitions of it that it computes in memory and reuses them in other actions on that dataset (or datasets derived from it). This allows future actions to be much faster (often by more than 10x). Caching is a key tool for iterative algorithms and fast interactive use.

You can mark an RDD to be persisted using the persist() or cache() methods on it. The first time it is computed in an action, it will be kept in memory on the nodes. Spark’s cache is fault-tolerant – if any partition of an RDD is lost, it will automatically be recomputed using the transformations that originally created it.

In addition, each persisted RDD can be stored using a different storage level, allowing you, for example, to persist the dataset on disk, persist it in memory but as serialized Java objects (to save space), replicate it across nodes. These levels are set by passing a StorageLevel object (Scala, Java, Python) to persist(). The cache() method is a shorthand for using the default storage level, which is StorageLevel.MEMORY_ONLY (store deserialized objects in memory). The full set of storage levels is: